README.md, before:

<h1 align="center">Hi there 👋, I'm Iuliia </h1>

<p align="center">
  <em>PhD Student · Computational Linguist · Multilingual AI Researcher</em>
</p>

---

## 👩‍💻 About Me

I'm a PhD student in Computational Linguistics at Universität des Saarlandes with 5+ years of hands-on experience in applied machine learning for natural language and speech processing. My research focuses on:

- 🧠 **Large Language Models**
- 🌍 **Cross-lingual transfer**
- 🧩 **Non-compositional expressions** (idioms, microsyntactic units)
- 🔊 **Speech-text transfer and multilingual intelligibility**

I’m passionate about improving the performance of multilingual NLP systems by understanding what current models still struggle with -- and why. My work combines computational methods, linguistic analysis, and empirical evaluation across Slavic, Germanic, and other languages.

---

## 🔧 Tech & Tools

- **Languages:** Python, Bash, R  
- **ML/NLP Frameworks:** PyTorch, Hugging Face Transformers, spaCy, NLTK  
- **Data & Evaluation:** pandas, NumPy, scikit-learn, langchain  
- **Other tools:** Git, LaTeX, Unix CLI, Docker

---

## 🔬 Current Projects

- 🧠 **Idiomatic Translation with LLMs** – Fine-tuning and evaluating multilingual models (LLama, DeepSeek, Whisper, SeamlessM4T, BERT-based models) on idiom-rich corpora across Slavic and Germanic languages.  
- 🔊 **Speech-Text Model Comparison** – Comparing performance of speech vs. text models on syntactic and semantic evaluation tasks.  
- 🌍 **Receptive Multilingualism** – Studying the impact of script, context, and phrase compositionality in cross-lingual comprehension and machine translation.

---

## 📚 Recent Publications

- 📄 *Zaitova et al. (2025)*: “Attention on Multiword Expressions: A Multilingual Study of BERT-based Models with Regard to Idiomaticity and Microsyntax” – [NAACL Findings]  
- 📄 *Zaitova et al. (2025)*: “It’s Not a Walk in the Park! Challenges of Idiom Translation in Speech-to-text Systems” – [Under Review at ACL]  
- 📄 *Zaitova et al. (2025)*: “Evaluating GPT Surprisal, Linguistic Distances, and Model Size for Predicting Cross-Language Intelligibility of Non-Compositional Expressions” – [Under Review at ACL]  
- 📄 *Zaitova et al. (2024)*: “Cross-Linguistic Intelligibility of Non-Compositional Expressions in Spoken Context” – [Interspeech]
- 📄 *Zaitova et al. (2024)*: “Cross-Linguistic Processing of Non-Compositional Expressions in Slavic Languages” – [Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon @ LREC-COLING 2024]


---

## 📫 How to Reach Me

- ✉️ Email: [iuliiazaitova@gmail.com](mailto:iuliiazaitova@gmail.com)  
- 💼 LinkedIn: [linkedin.com/in/iuliia-zaitova-5178b9158](https://www.linkedin.com/in/iuliia-zaitova-5178b9158/)  
- 🌐 Website: [iuliiazaitova.github.io](https://iuliiazaitova.github.io)

---

## 📌 Featured Projects

Here are a few projects that showcase my research and engineering work:

- [**Attention on Multiword Expressions: A Multilingual Study of BERT-based Models with Regard to Idiomaticity and Microsyntax**](https://github.com/IuliiaZaitova/mwe-attention)
  Code, models, and data for the paper "Attention on Multiword Expressions: A Multilingual Study of BERT-based Models with Regard to Idiomaticity and Microsyntax"

- [**non-compositional-expressions-slavic**](https://github.com/IuliiaZaitova/non-compositional-expressions-slavic)  
  Code and resources for analyzing non-compositional expressions across Slavic languages.

- [**Microsyntactic-Unit-Detection-using-Word-Embedding-Models-Slavic-Languages**](https://github.com/IuliiaZaitova/Microsyntactic-Unit-Detection-using-Word-Embedding-Models-Slavic-Languages)  
  BERT-based microsyntactic unit detection across Russian, Ukrainian, and Polish.

---

## 💡 Side Projects

- [🎉 plan-event.live](https://plan-event.live) – A playful web app I built for planning and sharing event details. Fun UX project + front-end dev practice!

---

<!--
## 📊 GitHub Stats
![Iuliia's GitHub stats](https://github-readme-stats.vercel.app/api?username=IuliiaZaitova&show_icons=true&theme=default)
-->

Commit message:

Revise README with updated bio and project details
Updated the README to reflect recent changes.

README.md, after:

<h1 align="center">Hi there 👋, I'm Iuliia </h1>

<p align="center">
  <em>PhD Student · Computational Linguistics · Multilingual AI Researcher</em>
</p>

---

## 👩‍💻 About Me

I'm a PhD student in Computational Linguistics at Universität des Saarlandes with 5+ years of hands-on experience in applied machine learning for natural language and speech processing. In 2025 I also completed a 6 month internship as an Applied Scientist at Amazon. My research mostly focuses on:

- 🧠 **Large Language Models**
- 🌍 **Cross-lingual transfer**
- 🧩 **Non-compositional expressions and figurative languages**
- 🔊 **Speech-text transfer and multilingual intelligibility**

I’m passionate about improving the performance of multilingual NLP systems by understanding what current generative models still struggle with -- and why. My work combines computational methods, linguistic analysis, and empirical evaluation across Slavic, Germanic, and other languages.

---

## 🔧 Tech & Tools

- **Languages:** Python, Bash, R  
- **ML/NLP Frameworks:** PyTorch, Hugging Face Transformers, spaCy, NLTK  
- **Data & Evaluation:** pandas, NumPy, scikit-learn, langchain  
- **Other tools:** Git, LaTeX, Unix CLI, Docker, aws, kubernetes

---

## 🔬 Current Projects

- 🧠 **Idiomatic Translation with LLMs** – Fine-tuning and evaluating multilingual models (LLama, DeepSeek, Whisper, SeamlessM4T, BERT-based models) on idiom-rich corpora across Slavic and Germanic languages.  
- 🔊 **Speech-Text Model Comparison** – Comparing performance of speech vs. text models on syntactic and semantic evaluation tasks.  
- 🌍 **Receptive Multilingualism** – Studying the impact of script, context, and phrase compositionality in cross-lingual comprehension and machine translation.

---

## 📚 Major Recent Publications
- 📄 *Zaitova et al. (2025)*: “It's Not a Walk in the Park! Challenges of Idiom Translation in Speech-to-text Systems” – [ACL]  
- 📄 *Zaitova et al. (2025)*: “Attention on Multiword Expressions: A Multilingual Study of BERT-based Models with Regard to Idiomaticity and Microsyntax” – [NAACL Findings]  
- 📄 *Zaitova et al. (2025)*: “It’s Not a Walk in the Park! Challenges of Idiom Translation in Speech-to-text Systems” – [Under Review at ACL]  
- 📄 *Zaitova et al. (2025)*: “Evaluating GPT Surprisal, Linguistic Distances, and Model Size for Predicting Cross-Language Intelligibility of Non-Compositional Expressions” – [Under Review at ACL]  
- 📄 *Zaitova et al. (2024)*: “Cross-Linguistic Intelligibility of Non-Compositional Expressions in Spoken Context” – [Interspeech]
- 📄 *Zaitova et al. (2024)*: “Cross-Linguistic Processing of Non-Compositional Expressions in Slavic Languages” – [Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon @ LREC-COLING 2024]


---

## 📫 How to Reach Me

- ✉️ Email: [iuliiazaitova@gmail.com](mailto:iuliiazaitova@gmail.com)  
- 💼 LinkedIn: [linkedin.com/in/iuliia-zaitova-5178b9158](https://www.linkedin.com/in/iuliia-zaitova-5178b9158/)  
- 🌐 Website: [iuliiazaitova.github.io](https://iuliiazaitova.github.io)

---

## 📌 Featured Projects

Here are a few projects that showcase my research and engineering work:

- [**Attention on Multiword Expressions: A Multilingual Study of BERT-based Models with Regard to Idiomaticity and Microsyntax**](https://github.com/IuliiaZaitova/mwe-attention)
  Code, models, and data for the paper "Attention on Multiword Expressions: A Multilingual Study of BERT-based Models with Regard to Idiomaticity and Microsyntax"

- [**non-compositional-expressions-slavic**](https://github.com/IuliiaZaitova/non-compositional-expressions-slavic)  
  Code and resources for analyzing non-compositional expressions across Slavic languages.

- [**Microsyntactic-Unit-Detection-using-Word-Embedding-Models-Slavic-Languages**](https://github.com/IuliiaZaitova/Microsyntactic-Unit-Detection-using-Word-Embedding-Models-Slavic-Languages)  
  BERT-based microsyntactic unit detection across Russian, Ukrainian, and Polish.

---


<!--
## 📊 GitHub Stats
![Iuliia's GitHub stats](https://github-readme-stats.vercel.app/api?username=IuliiaZaitova&show_icons=true&theme=default)
-->
